README.md, before:

goobar
======

**goobar** is a status line generator similar in spirit to
[`i3status(1)`](https://i3wm.org/docs/i3status.html).  The main difference is
that goobar is written in [GNU Guile](https://www.gnu.org/software/guile/) and
highly extensible.

It consists of two distinct parts: a set of *status collectors*, and a program
that converts their results to a format that can be consumed by window managers
such as Sway or i3.

# Installation

First make sure Guile and [Guile-Netlink](https://git.lepiller.eu/guile-netlink/)
are installed and usable on your system.  Then, from a source checkout, run:

```
$ autoreconf -vif
$ ./configure && make -j $(nproc)
# At this stage, you can run the program as:
$ ./pre-inst-env goobar
# Or install it:
$ sudo make install
```

If you have [GNU Guix](https://guix.gnu.org/) on your system, you can install
goobar with e.g. `guix package -p /tmp/goobar -f guix.scm` and then run it as
`/tmp/goobar/bin/goobar`.

# Configuration

By default, the output is similar to that of *i3status*:

```
$ goobar
IPv6: ❌ | 🖴 81% | 📶 Home Wifi (68%, 144.4 Mb/s) | E: down | 🔋 75.62% 06:35 | 🔊 99% | 🏋️ 0.40 | 🌡️46°C | 6.7 GiB | 2023-06-26 20:49:05
IPv6: ❌ | 🖴 81% | 📶 Home Wifi (69%, 144.4 Mb/s) | E: down | 🔋 75.55% 06:31 | 🔊 99% | 🏋️ 0.44 | 🌡️47°C | 6.7 GiB | 2023-06-26 20:49:10
[...]
```

It can be customized by creating `~/.config/goobar/config.scm`.  This file
should return a list of either `<status>` objects, or plain strings.

Statuses or strings can be "annotated" to provide extra properties, such as
custom color, width, alignment, etc.  See `man 7 swaybar-protocol` for a
list of properties, all of which are supported by `(goobar annotation)`.

Example:

```
(use-modules (status)
             (status collector backlight)
             (status collector battery)
             (status collector cpu-usage)
             (status collector disk)
             (status collector ipv6)
             (status collector load)
             (status collector network-rate)
             (status collector pulseaudio)
             (status collector time)
             (status collector wifi)
             (goobar annotation)
             (ice-9 format))

(define (random-color)
  (format #f "#~2,'0x~2,'0x~2,'0x"
          (random 255) (random 255) (random 255)))

(list (disk-status "/" #:degraded-threshold "80%")
      (disk-status "/home")
      (ipv6-status
       ;; Don't bother printing the full IPv6 address.
       #:format (lambda (status)
                  (if (status-good? status) "✔" "❌")))
      (annotate
       (wifi-status "wlp0s20f3"
                    #:format
                    (lambda (status)
                      (if (status-bad? status)
                          "down"
                          (let ((data (status-data status)))
                            (format #f "~a (~d%~a)"
                                    (assoc-ref data 'ssid)
                                    (assoc-ref data 'quality)
                                    ;; Print bitrate only when available.
                                    (format #f "~@[, ~a~]"
                                            (and=> (assoc-ref data 'bitrate)
                                                   format-bitrate)))))))
       ;; Disable separator to meld with the rate status below.
       #:separator? #f)
      (network-rate-status "wlp0s20f3"
                           #:format
                           (lambda (status)
                             (let* ((data (status-data status))
                                    (down (assoc-ref data 'rx-bytes/sec)))
                               (format #f "⬇ ~a" (format-bytes down)))))
      (battery-status "BAT0")
      ;; Remove silly load icon.
      (annotate (load-status '5min) #:icon #f)
      (cpu-usage-status)
      (pulseaudio-status "0")
      (backlight-status)
      (annotate (format #f "Hi ~a!" (getenv "USER")) #:color (random-color))
      (time-status "%d/%m %T"))
```

# Contributing

Pull requests welcome!  There are a bunch of TODOs in the code, and probably
even more bugs.  Feel free to add more status collectors.  Note that the
status collector API is subject to change, feedback wanted.

Planned features that are not yet implemented:

* Bidirectional communication (click events)
* More output formats (dzen2, xmobar, etc)

# License

Unless otherwise noted, all code is GNU General Public License version 3,
or (at your option) any later version.

Commit message:

All dependencies are optional.
* configure.ac: Warn on missing dependencies instead of error.  Move
AM_CONDITIONAL after the test blocks for consistency.
* Makefile.am (SOURCES, TESTS): Guard inclusion of modules that
require external dependencies behind HAVE_FOO macros.
* goobar/configuration.scm (default-configuration): Check if netlink
can be loaded before including network statusen.
* README.md (Requirements): New section.

README.md, after:

goobar
======

**goobar** is a status line generator similar in spirit to
[`i3status(1)`](https://i3wm.org/docs/i3status.html).  The main difference is
that goobar is written in [GNU Guile](https://www.gnu.org/software/guile/) and
highly extensible.

It consists of two distinct parts: a set of *status collectors*, and a program
that converts their results to a format that can be consumed by window managers
such as Sway or i3.

# Requirements

Goobar has no dependencies apart from Guile itself.  For extra functionality,
consider installing:

* [Guile-Netlink](https://git.lepiller.eu/guile-netlink/)
for Ethernet and WiFi information.
* [Guile-GnuTLS](https://gitlab.com/gnutls/guile/)
for HTTP-based status collectors.
* [Guile-SRFI-180](https://github.com/scheme-requests-for-implementation/srfi-180)
for status collectors that consume JSON.
* [PulseAudio](https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/PulseAudio/)
for PulseAudio information.

# Installation

From a source checkout, run:

```
$ autoreconf -vif
$ ./configure && make -j $(nproc)
# At this stage, you can run the program as:
$ ./pre-inst-env goobar
# Or install it:
$ sudo make install
```

If you have [GNU Guix](https://guix.gnu.org/) on your system, you can install
goobar with e.g. `guix package -p /tmp/goobar -f guix.scm` and then run it as
`/tmp/goobar/bin/goobar`.

# Configuration

By default, the output is similar to that of *i3status*:

```
$ goobar
IPv6: ❌ | 🖴 81% | 📶 Home Wifi (68%, 144.4 Mb/s) | E: down | 🔋 75.62% 06:35 | 🔊 99% | 🏋️ 0.40 | 🌡️46°C | 6.7 GiB | 2023-06-26 20:49:05
IPv6: ❌ | 🖴 81% | 📶 Home Wifi (69%, 144.4 Mb/s) | E: down | 🔋 75.55% 06:31 | 🔊 99% | 🏋️ 0.44 | 🌡️47°C | 6.7 GiB | 2023-06-26 20:49:10
[...]
```

It can be customized by creating `~/.config/goobar/config.scm`.  This file
should return a list of either `<status>` objects, or plain strings.

Statuses or strings can be "annotated" to provide extra properties, such as
custom color, width, alignment, etc.  See `man 7 swaybar-protocol` for a
list of properties, all of which are supported by `(goobar annotation)`.

Example:

```
(use-modules (status)
             (status collector backlight)
             (status collector battery)
             (status collector cpu-usage)
             (status collector disk)
             (status collector ipv6)
             (status collector load)
             (status collector network-rate)
             (status collector pulseaudio)
             (status collector time)
             (status collector wifi)
             (goobar annotation)
             (ice-9 format))

(define (random-color)
  (format #f "#~2,'0x~2,'0x~2,'0x"
          (random 255) (random 255) (random 255)))

(list (disk-status "/" #:degraded-threshold "80%")
      (disk-status "/home")
      (ipv6-status
       ;; Don't bother printing the full IPv6 address.
       #:format (lambda (status)
                  (if (status-good? status) "✔" "❌")))
      (annotate
       (wifi-status "wlp0s20f3"
                    #:format
                    (lambda (status)
                      (if (status-bad? status)
                          "down"
                          (let ((data (status-data status)))
                            (format #f "~a (~d%~a)"
                                    (assoc-ref data 'ssid)
                                    (assoc-ref data 'quality)
                                    ;; Print bitrate only when available.
                                    (format #f "~@[, ~a~]"
                                            (and=> (assoc-ref data 'bitrate)
                                                   format-bitrate)))))))
       ;; Disable separator to meld with the rate status below.
       #:separator? #f)
      (network-rate-status "wlp0s20f3"
                           #:format
                           (lambda (status)
                             (let* ((data (status-data status))
                                    (down (assoc-ref data 'rx-bytes/sec)))
                               (format #f "⬇ ~a" (format-bytes down)))))
      (battery-status "BAT0")
      ;; Remove silly load icon.
      (annotate (load-status '5min) #:icon #f)
      (cpu-usage-status)
      (pulseaudio-status "0")
      (backlight-status)
      (annotate (format #f "Hi ~a!" (getenv "USER")) #:color (random-color))
      (time-status "%d/%m %T"))
```

# Contributing

Pull requests welcome!  There are a bunch of TODOs in the code, and probably
even more bugs.  Feel free to add more status collectors.  Note that the
status collector API is subject to change, feedback wanted.

Planned features that are not yet implemented:

* Bidirectional communication (click events)
* More output formats (dzen2, xmobar, etc)

# License

Unless otherwise noted, all code is GNU General Public License version 3,
or (at your option) any later version.
